Network Topology (#43)
bloxapp/SIPs: sips/network_topology.md

|     Author     |           Title            |  Category  |       Status        |    Date    |
| -------------- | -------------------------- | ---------- | ------------------- | ---------- |
| Matheus Franco | Network Topology           | Network    | open-for-discussion | 2024-03-06 |

## Table of Contents <!-- omit from toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Spec Change](#spec-change)
- [Alternative Solutions](#alternative-solutions)
	- [1. Greedy Algorithm](#1-greedy-algorithm)
	- [2. MaxReach](#2-maxreach)
	- [3. LowestID](#3-lowestid)
- [Comparisons](#comparisons)

## Summary

> This SIP proposes to useMinHash for assigning committees to topics, aiming to reduce the number of irrelevant (non-committee) messages operators must process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This SIP proposes to use [MinHash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MinHash) for assigning committees to topics, aiming to reduce the number of irrelevant (non-committee) messages operators must process.
```

missing space + link

func GetCommitteeID(committee []OperatorID) CommitteeID {
	// sort
	sort.Slice(committee, func(i, j int) bool {
		return committee[i] < committee[j]
	})
	// Convert to bytes
	bytes := make([]byte, len(committee)*4)
	for i, v := range committee {
		binary.LittleEndian.PutUint32(bytes[i*4:], uint32(v))
	}
	// Hash
	return sha256.Sum256(bytes)
}
```

This randomness forces operators active in many committees to listen to multiple topics and process many irrelevant messages, which limits scalability. 

In contrast, MinHash assigns committees to topics based on the minimum hash of the committee operators. This increases the probability of committees being assigned to the same topic when they have most of their operators in common.

With MinHash, the probability of two committees getting the same topic is the number of shared operators over the number of total operators.

## Spec Change
For each committee, we assign a topic based on the minimum hash of the committee operators.

```go
func AssignCommitteeToTopic(committee []OperatorID) uint64 {
	minHash := uint64(math.MaxUint64)
	for _, id := range committee {
		hash := sha256(id)
		if hash < minHash {
			minHash = hash
		}
	}

> 	return minHash % NUM_TOPICS

Reviewer 2: yes, it should be specified. 

Both truncation (high bits) and low bits work well and the implementation is very easy: just read an unsinged integer from either the front or the back of the slice.  Endianness of the read should also be specified, big endian usually.

> 	return minHash % NUM_TOPICS

Author: Agree, will fix that

}
```

## Alternative Solutions

> 

Reviewer: since you decided to go to those details, maybe add the following:
1. Definition of the properties (so it is clear to the reader)
2. nice to have an introduction sentence: "these are the alternatives we explored"

The cost of adding a committee to topic $t$ is given by:

$$Agg(c,t) = | O_c \setminus O_t | \times v_t + | O_t \setminus O_c | \times v_c$$

**Initialization**:
- Sort committees by validator count.
- Assign the largest 128 committees to the 128 topics.
- Insert remaining committees greedily into the topic minimizing the above cost function.

**Event Handling**:

- Adding a new committee: assign using insertion logic.
- Adding validators in existing committees: no topic change.
- Removing validators: no topic change, unless the committee is empty and, in that case, it's removed.

#### 2. MaxReach

**Properties**: Stateful, unstable, history-independent.

**Rationale**: This stateful model tracks each operator’s participation count in active committees.
In order to combine well-connected committee groups, a committee is assigned to a topic based on the operator with the **highest reach** (most committees).
The operator’s ID is hashed and mapped modulo 128.

Note: It's unstable because adding a committee can change operator counts, affecting assignments of other committees. However, it shouldn't be very common.

#### 3. LowestID

> **Properties**: Stateless, (and thus) stable, history-independent.

Author: Exactly, our minhash has the same properties :)

	FOR each operator_id IN committee:
		# 1. Serialize the uint64 Operator ID to 8 bytes (Little-Endian)
		input_bytes = serialize_uint64_little_endian(operator_id)
		
		# 2. Compute the SHA-256 hash, resulting in 32 bytes
		hash_bytes = SHA256(input_bytes)
		
		# 3. Convert to uint256 (Big-Endian)
		current_int = uint256_from_bytes_big_endian(hash_bytes)
		
		# 4. Get minimum
		IF current_int < min_int:
			min_int = current_int
	
	# 5. Modulo for topic ID
	RETURN min_int MOD NUM_TOPICS
```

## Fork Transition

To safely transition through the fork, we define the transition policy below. Let:
- $old$: denotes the set of topics the operator should be subscribed to before the fork (according to its committees),
- $new$: denotes the set of topics the operator should subscribe to after the fork.

### Before the Fork

The operator is subscribed to the $old$ topics and publishes to them.

`PRIOR_WINDOW` epochs before the fork, it subscribes to all $new + old$.
During this window, it does **not reject** any message with a valid signature in the new topics ($new \setminus old$).

We set `PRIOR_WINDOW = 2` epochs to allow
enough time for the operator to set up the new topics before the fork,

> and avoid a long overloading period (due to the extra messages being processed in the new topic).

Reviewer 3: Why the extra messages? Honest nodes shouldn't publish to the new topics. But, true, there might be some overlap between the new and old topics, and nodes will see traffic in subnets that are their new ones. Those messages should be ignored as in the wrong topic.

Reviewer 3: Yes, I'm referring to the same context. It might be worth elaborating a bit more on the spec to make it clearer. 

Should the new nodes propagate these messages? Shouldn't the mesh continue working fine as it did before the new nodes joined?

Reviewer 2: we should also mention warming up the mesh, it is an important consideration.

Reviewer 2: we should also mention warming up the mesh, it is an important consideration.

Reviewer 3: @MatheusFranco99 You're right, we need to propagate if by warming up we mean start behaving like a normal peer in that mesh. But we should make the distinction that we'll accept but not process messages during this period, as they aren't relevant. I also believe we need to make sure that doubling the node load (regarding validation and propagation) won't impact its duties.

	
	# 5. Modulo for topic ID
	RETURN min_int MOD NUM_TOPICS
```

## Fork Transition

To safely transition through the fork, we define the transition policy below. Let:
- $old$: denotes the set of topics the operator should be subscribed to before the fork (according to its committees),
- $new$: denotes the set of topics the operator should subscribe to after the fork.

### Before the Fork

The operator is subscribed to the $old$ topics and publishes to them.

`PRIOR_WINDOW` epochs before the fork, it subscribes to all $new \cup old$.
During this window, for the new topics ($new \setminus old$), the operator will:
- warm up its mesh for the new topics by setting up GRAFT connections,
- ensure it doesn't harm the propagation of messages by accepting them (even if they aren't relevant/processed for its committees),
and only rejecting in case of invalid signatures.

We set `PRIOR_WINDOW = 2` epochs to allow
enough time for the operator to set up the new topics before the fork,
and avoid a long overloading period (due to the extra messages being processed in the new topic).

### At and After the Fork

At the fork epoch, the operator immediately unsubscribes from the old topics

> (more precisely, $old \setminus new$).

Reviewer 2: yes, would we be able to accept them?

It is not a major disruption, and it is better to avoid complexities of processing in transit messages during the fork; it doesn't last all that long.

> (more precisely, $old \setminus new$).

Reviewer 2: yes, would we be able to accept them?

It is not a major disruption, and it is better to avoid complexities of processing in transit messages during the fork; it doesn't last all that long.

> (more precisely, $old \setminus new$).

Reviewer 3: I agree, probably not worth the complexity. But should we make the trade-off more explicit?

## Viability

The model can be seen as a state machine that holds a validator-topic map and can be updated upon a validator addition or removal.

Any node in the network must agree on the current state so that the validator-topic map is consistent between nodes.

A state machine replication can be achieved if:
1. the replicas agree on the order of the events (validator addition and removal).
2. the transition function is deterministic.

Regarding condition (1), it's possible that a replica misses an event and produces an inconsistent state. To mitigate this issue, we can delay an event processing by some time interval to increase the probability of receiving all events before that. This is already included in the implementation which set the events to be processed only after 8 eth1 blocks.

Regarding condition (2), the operations in the transition function are well-defined and deterministic as we shall see next.

In our case, there are extra assumptions that must be met depending on the nature of the model. Namely, upon an event, we say that:
- a model has "map dependency" if it may change the assignment of other validators added previously.

> - a model has "map isolation" if it does not change the assignment of other validators added previously.

Author: Yes! Stability is a much better name. Thanks!

			t.topicMap[insertionTopic][validatorIndex] = struct{}{}
		}

		// insert committee operators
		for _, operatorID := range committees[committeeIndex] {
			t.operatorsInTopic[insertionTopic][operatorID] = struct{}{}
		}

		committeeIndex += 1
	}

	for committeeIndex < len(committees) {
		// Get topic with least impact
		topicWithLeastImpact := t.GetTopicWithLeastImpact(committees[committeeIndex], len(committeeValidators[committeeIndex]))

		// Insert validators in the topic
		for _, validatorIndex := range committeeValidators[committeeIndex] {
			t.topicMap[topicWithLeastImpact][validatorIndex] = struct{}{}
		}

		// insert committee operators
		for _, operatorID := range committees[committeeIndex] {
			t.operatorsInTopic[topicWithLeastImpact][operatorID] = struct{}{}
		}

		committeeIndex += 1
	}

}

func (t *TopicAssignment) GetTopicWithLeastImpact(committee []types.OperatorID, numberOfValidators int) int {
	// init best
	bestTopic := 1
	bestCost := math.MaxInt

	for topicIndex, topicValidators := range t.topicMap {
		// compute cost
		equalOperators := t.NumberOfIntersectingOperators(committee, t.operatorsInTopic[topicIndex]) // Compute intersection in O(n + m) time

> 		cost := (len(committee)-equalOperators)*len(topicValidators) + (len(t.operatorsInTopic[topicIndex])-equalOperators)*numberOfValidators

Author: I believe you are referring to the equation, am I right?
So, the aggregation impact of joining operators $A$ and $B$ with validators $V_a$ and $V_b$ is

$$I = V_a * (|B \setminus A|) + V_b(|A \setminus B|)$$

So, on the left side, we have [the number of existing validators in the topic] * [new operators].

On the right side, we have [the number of new validators] * [operators in the topic that will start listening to these validators]

		// update
		if cost < bestCost {
			bestTopic = topicIndex
			bestCost = cost
		}
	}

	return bestTopic
}
```

### Addition Event

For the addition algorithm, there are two possible approaches.

#### Addition algorithm 1

If the new validator's committee already exists, the first algorithm adds the validator to its committee's topic, splits such topic and performs the *best aggregation*. The *best aggregation* operation compares the cost of doing an aggregation for each pair of committees ($\mathcal{O}(t_{max}^2)$) and performs the aggregation with minimal cost.

If the committee is new, it considers it as a new topic and performs the *best aggregation* operation.

```R
1. procedure Add_Validator(Topics, Validator, committee)
2.      existsInTopic, topic <- Topics.Has(committee)
3.      if existsInTopic then
4.          Topics.AddValidator(topic, Validator)
5.          Topics.Split(topic)

> 6.          Topics.AggregationStep()

Author: Adding the *split* operation definition.

> 6.          Topics.AggregationStep()

Reviewer 2: this is enough to reject this. Having unstable topics can result in problems during reconfiguration as creating a new mesh is not instant.

> 6.          Topics.AggregationStep()

Reviewer 2: this is enough to reject this. Having unstable topics can result in problems during reconfiguration as creating a new mesh is not instant.

7.      else
8.          topic <- GenerateTopicID(committee)
9.          Topics.AddValidator(topic, Validator)
10.         Topics.AggregationStep()

> ```

Author: 1 - The `R` label is just for looking like pseudo-code
3 - Not mandatory but I like it in pseudo-codes for references.

Yes, it was taken from the simulator repo and I added some little adjustments.

#### Addition algorithm 2

If the new validator's committee already exists, the second algorithm adds the validator to its committee's topic.

If the committee is new, it finds the topic with minimal aggregation impact and insert the validator in such topic ($\mathcal{O}(t_{max})$).

```R
1. procedure Add_Validator(Topics, Validator, committee)
2.      existsInTopic, topic <- Topics.Has(committee)
3.      if existsInTopic then
4.          Topics.AddValidator(topic, Validator)
5.      else

> 6.          bestTopic <- Topics.FindTopicWithMinimumAggregationImpact(Validator, committee)

Author: Yes

```R
1. procedure RemoveValidator(Validator, Topics)
2.      committee <- Committee(Validator)
3.      topic <- Topics.FindTopic(Validator)
4.      Topics.RemoveValidator(topic, Validator)
5.      if Topics.TopicLen(topic) > 0 then
6.          Topics.Split(topic)
7.          Topics.AggregationStep()
8.      else
9.          Topics.RemoveTopic(topic)
10.         Topics.SplitBestTopic()
```

#### Addition algorithm 2

The second algorithm just removes the validator from its assigned topic.

```R
1. procedure Remove_Validator(V, Topics)
2.      committee <- Committee(V)
3.      topic <- Topics.FindTopic(V)
4.      Topics.RemoveValidator(topic, V)
```

### Comparison

The first algorithm requires more processing time, produces a better solution in terms of non-committee messages, and forces the model to have "map dependency".

The second algorithm requires less processing time, produces a worse solution in terms of non-committee messages, and allows the model to have "map isolation".

> We propose going with the second solution due to the "map isolation" feature.

Author: For sure. However, I believe that the addition/removal operations may be changed in a future fork if we want.

|     Author     |           Title            |  Category  |       Status        |    Date    |
| -------------- | -------------------------- | ---------- | ------------------- | ---------- |
| Matheus Franco | Network Topology           | Network    | open-for-discussion | 2024-03-06 |

## Summary

Modify the validator-topic assignment function using a greedy algorithm to minimize the number of non-committee messages an operator receives.

## Motivation

Currently, an operator needs to deal with the processing of several non-committee messages. The mean rate goes as high as $97$%. Even though non-committee messages require less cryptographic processing, in total, they may represent a scalability barrier.

## Rationale

> The current topic assignment function is calculated using the validator public key modulo 128, which makes it similar to a *random* model.

Reviewer 4: @MatheusFranco99 Was the SIP updated post Alan fork?

Author: No, but I currently have a task to update it + spec it. So, it will be done soon

Both of these problems motivates us to, periodically, fully re-start the algorithm.
Thus, we propose that every 100 epochs (or whenever the epoch number modulo 100 is 0), the previous epoch's state is considered as the initial state
and the algorithm is re-started.
The window of 100 epochs was choosen because the operation is costly and, thus, can't be too frequent.
The previous epoch's state was chosen because the re-start epoch's state may be inconsistent between nodes.
The operations between the previous epoch and the re-start epoch should be executed as normal operations.

## Small topics mitigation techniques

Similarly to the current model, the proposed model has the issue of producing very small topics, for example with 4 operators.
A bigger topic is advisable as it increases the reliability of a node receiving a message.
For example, two geographically distant nodes may have connection problems and intermediary nodes may help propagate a message.
Moreover, more nodes in a network (or topic) usually represent a stronger defense against common attacks.
Therefore, we present a technique to artifically increase the size of topics.

> ### Random participation

Reviewer 5: Do we have a decision on how many extra topics will they subscribe? 1?

Author: I didn't explore much in this document about how many extra topics we would need, but the simulations showed that 1 was enough to reach the previous topics' sizes.
This probably happens because the number of operators (1.4k) is ~11x bigger than the number of topics (128), so this results in 11 more participants per topic on average (which is good enough to reach the previous standard).

However, note that this mitigation technique is not a must and we need to confirm if we really want it now.
Also, non-operator nodes in topics already increase their size and reliability (though I don't know how many they are).

C.C. @liorrutenberg  @GalRogozinski

Currently, committees are assigned through topics in a random way.
This causes operators participating in many committees to listen to several topics, having to process a considerable fraction of non-committee messages.
Even though non-committee messages require less cryptographic processing, in total, they may represent a scalability barrier.

## Rationale

The current topic assignment function takes as input the `CommitteeID` of the committee, which is a hash of the byte array that represents the committee's operators.
Then, the function converts it to an integer and returns it modulo 128.
Due to the hashing operation, this function is similar to a *random* model.

```go
func CommitteeSubnet(cid spectypes.CommitteeID) uint64 {
	subnet := new(big.Int).Mod(new(big.Int).SetBytes(cid[:]), bigIntSubnetsCount)
	return subnet.Uint64()
}

func GetCommitteeID(committee []OperatorID) CommitteeID {
	// sort
	sort.Slice(committee, func(i, j int) bool {
		return committee[i] < committee[j]
	})
	// Convert to bytes
	bytes := make([]byte, len(committee)*4)
	for i, v := range committee {
		binary.LittleEndian.PutUint32(bytes[i*4:], uint32(v))
	}
	// Hash
	return sha256.Sum256(bytes)
}
```

> To avoid the hurdles of the random model, this SIP proposels a greedy model that attempts to put committees with similar operators on the same topic.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To avoid the hurdles of the random model, this SIP proposes a greedy model that attempts to put committees with similar operators on the same topic.
```

| 4                    | 60.31%                             |
| 7                    | 75.20%                             |
| 10                   | 81.96%                             |
| 13                   | 85.82%                             |

> [!NOTE]
> Alternative [Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locality-sensitive_hashing) functions were tested but proved unsuitable for our context:
> - **SimHash (Charikar's Hash)**:
> While SimHash theoretically approximates Cosine Similarity,
> which offers a higher collision probability than MinHash (e.g. ~77% vs. 60% for 4-element sets),
> it failed in practice because it produces a "fingerprint" for the entire set rather than selecting a common element in a small discrete set.
> Even though similar committees produce similar fingerprints, a single bit difference, caused by changing one operator, results in a completely different integer value
> (and thus resulting topic).
> - **Consensus MinHash (Voting) and Multi-Hash Minimum**: We attempted to boost stability by (i) computing k independent MinHashes and taking a majority vote,
> and (ii) by taking the global minimum of the $k$ hashes. 

> > However, this offered no improvement and only incurred more computation overhead.

Reviewer: Wow! nice that you found the time to do all of this ❤️
